---
title: "Don't Bother The Driver: Sensor-Scheduling for Cognitive State Estimation During Automated Driving"
collection: publications
category: thesis
permalink: /publication/2025-08-08-BS-Thesis
excerpt: ""
date: 2025-08-08
venue: "Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University & Purdue University"
paperurl: ""
citation: "Bossi, E. (2025). \"Don't Bother The Driver: Sensor-Scheduling for Cognitive State Estimation During Automated Driving.\" *Bachelor's Thesis*."
---

**Abstract**:

Estimating human cognitive states is increasingly important for enabling safe and efficient human–autonomy interaction, particularly in safety-critical settings such as automated driving. Cognitive states, such as trust, workload, and perceived risk, are known to influence driver behavior but are not directly observable; instead, they must be inferred from behavioral data, physiological data, and intermittent self-reports of these states. Prior work on cognitive state estimation in human–autonomy interaction—--particularly in automated driving--—has predominantly used static, categorical models based on unimodal inputs, with limited support for real-time updates, uncertainty quantification, or adaptive querying of human input.

This paper introduces a novel modeling framework that treats cognitive states as continuous-valued, time-varying latent variables and automation reliance as a discrete, observable output. The framework facilitates combining self-reports and psychophysiological measurements in state estimation framework that utilizes a hybrid dynamical system model. Crucially, the framework also quantifies predictive uncertainty, enabling the system to identify when to actively solicit human input. This allows for adaptive self-report scheduling to improve sample efficiency while minimizing user burden. The central research question is: *How can online machine learning and dynamical systems theory be combined to enable real-time, participant-specific estimation of automation reliance—--while quantifying uncertainty to guide when adaptive systems should actively seek human input during automated driving?*

Our approach involves predicting a human's trust, workload, and perceived risk using a affine dynamical model. These latent states are then used to predict reliance through a tree-based classifier. Model uncertainty informs whether to incorporate new self-reports; when unavailable but needed, a particle filter fuses selected physiological and gaze features via an auxiliary tree-based ensemble model to refine predictions under non-stationary conditions.

Experimental results show improved prediction and estimation accuracy over static or purely data-driven baselines, underscoring the advantages of integrating dynamical systems with machine learning in an online framework to account for the time-varying nature of human behavior. This approach enables individualized, continuous cognitive state estimation and lays the groundwork for closed-loop decision-making. Future work will focus on incorporating these estimates into controllers that intelligently manage driver engagement in complex, dynamic environments.
